[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]
[PLAYING GUITAR AND SINGING IN
GREEK]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The
one common understanding
of all truly great leaders,
philosophers, and artists
was that our societies
are worth nothing
without our creative input.
Far beyond a function of
mind, the creative impulse
requires openness to source.
And that source,
when unrestricted,
can create boundless
beauty in this world.
When we look around,
however, it appears
we're not seeing this
divine reflection
of our collective true selves.
This is where guides
and teachers come in,
to help us unlock the
doors that have been sealed
shut through a life of
conformity, conscious
and subconscious.
One such teacher is creative
artist Chris Spheeris.
Music, poetry,
photography, and film.
He says it all comes from
beyond his conscious mind,
and that we all
have access to it.
Thank you for being here.
I love "Horepse" is
the name of that song.
And I bring it up because it's
going to feature prominently
a little later on
in our conversation.
So I just have to set that up.
And it's such a great story,
you're going to love it.
OK.
>>CHRIS SPHEERIS: Can I
say thanks for having me?
>>REGINA: Yes, you may.
You're most welcome.
>>SPHEERIS: It's really
exciting to be doing this.
Thank you.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I want to start with
something you said off camera.
I wrote it down.
It says-- because you need to
explain this to us, all right?
"The more we are
distracted, the more
we're denying ourselves love."
We are distracted.
Most of us don't feel the
love in our daily lives.
What do you mean by that?
>>SPHEERIS: Let me
give you an example.
Let's say you ask
me that question,
and I'm holding my cell
phone here, and I say, well,
just second, I've got a text .
Let me just finish this real
quick, and I'm reading my text,
right?
So how loved do you feel, or how
loved would your audience feel
if I was sort of on my cell
phone, I finished a text,
put it down, and
then addressed you?
That's just a gross example.
>>REGINA: I hate it.
>>SPHEERIS: But what's
behind it is that inspiration
is given to us as the
operative language of creation.
It is the core energy,
the prime directive
of existence, inspiration
and creativity.
I've been thinking about
this prior to this interview,
and last night I was thinking
about-- most cultures have
called God the creator.
So look how much importance
we put on creativity
in a spiritual sense.
So where does love fit in?
Well, if inspiration
is a state of openness,
a state of presence,
which is very
important to this conversation,
the state of complete awareness
of being and being completely
absorbed and engrossed
in our experience where there's
no distraction-- meaning even
our thoughts aren't
distracting us,
right-- then I think our natural
state is that of being in love,
in the state of love.
>>REGINA: That presence.
>>SPHEERIS: Presence.
So I equate presence with
love, with inspiration.
It's all the same.
So when I have thoughts running,
or when I'm watching something
and I'm speaking to you, and
I'm looking over your shoulder
because there's a television
screen or something else,
or I'm thinking about my
day, I'm not loving you.
And with myself, if
I'm running my program
with all kinds of things
going on like this,
and I'm reaching for the
phone and going to email,
I'm doing this, I'm doing that.
I'm not allowing
myself to be loved.
Because when I can fully be
aware of what's coming to me,
fully be aware of my experience,
no matter what it is,
I am being loved by the universe
by being given pure awareness.
OK?
So there's our connection.
You get that.
>>REGINA: I get it.
And you know, the
reason I wanted
to have this
conversation, simply put,
was, you know, I interview
a lot of amazing people,
and a lot of people who
bring the kind of science
pathway to spirituality
into the conversation,
like Joe Dispenza
and Gregg Braden.
You have performed
alongside Gregg.
I know you guys have
been in dialogue.
He requests to have your
presence there, and all that.
But when I was thinking
about that, I thought,
you know, all these men give
these beautiful presentations,
but we come back
to this place where
we have to buy our lives back.
We have to buy
ourselves back somehow.
We have to take command
of our own reality again.
But no one says how.
And to me, the
greatest factor in this
is being cut off from our
own source of creativity.
And that's why I wanted to have
this conversation with you,
because you're the most
creative person I've ever met.
I mean, every day you're
creating something.
We did an interview
once years ago,
and you said, if I don't
create something in a day,
I feel like I'm dying.
And you create everything.
I mean, you're
multi-talented, obviously.
>>SPHEERIS: I'm an
inspiration shark.
I have to keep moving,
otherwise I can't breathe.
I have to keep creating.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And so-- but let's get to your
family and the background,
how that happen for
you, because a lot
of the kids of the parents
watching this right now,
they don't know how to
re-inspire their kids.
They put them in front of the
computer, they have an iPhone,
they have some Xbox.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
Well, there's two things
you just asked me.
One is how do we
get, I call it back
to the state of
inspiration and creativity?
Because we're given
that when we're young.
There's some amazing
statistic somewhere--
what is it about how our
creativity diminishes
through time?
>>REGINA: Oh yes.
I think you read
the same one I did,
which is that up to the age of
five, we still have about 80%
of our creative potential
available to us.
And by the age of 12, when we
enter school-- kindergarten,
right?-- it's
diminished down to 2%.
Shocking, by 12.
By the time we hit
pubescence, which
should be wildly creative.
>>SPHEERIS: So can
anyone out there imagine
that most of us, most of them--
I have to not include myself
there, really-- are operating
on 2% of our creative potential?
And I believe our
creative potential
is our full potential of being.
That's everything that is.
>>REGINA: Everything.
>>SPHEERIS: It's like
taking a beautiful plant
and cutting 98% of the branches
off and the leaves off,
and expecting it to survive.
That's what we're doing.
So let me address
your first question.
How do we get back?
>>REGINA: No, I want to hear
about your family first.
>>SPHEERIS: Oh, the Greek thing.
OK, that's fine.
>>REGINA: OK, you're Greek.
You guys are known for
beauty and all this, so--
>>SPHEERIS: Well, but
the culture, Greece
had a history--
Ancient Greece, I mean,
you could almost say
that they worshipped
intellect and the arts.
I mean, it was the major,
major fueling factor
of Greek culture.
Everything was about balance
and beauty and appreciation
of beauty and intellect
and ideas and all of this.
Well, handed down genetically
through the millennium--
>>REGINA: And
you're Greek Greek.
>>SPHEERIS: I'm
100% Greek, right.
And my grandparents
were all born in Greece.
But handed down into my
boyhood and into my upbringing,
my parents always
encouraged whatever
was educational and creative.
There was no limit on
creativity in my household.
My mother is a painter.
She's still with us.
And she still sketches and
draws beautifully at almost 87.
But that was never stifled.
And that's the important
thing I want to say.
It's not that I just
inherited a certain amount
of artistic talent, a genetic
predisposition to creating.
Fine.
That's probably the case.
>>REGINA: That's a soul
imprint, so to speak.
>>SPHEERIS: Yeah.
But what's really
important is that wasn't
stifled in my household.
All of us were encouraged.
My sister to play classical
piano, my brother, he
did the most incredible
drawings when he was young.
I mean, anything
that was creative.
And I didn't do music
when I was quite young,
but I was an oil painter
at the age of 11.
And I had an exhibition to my
sixth grade class of, like, 12
oil paintings that
were abstract,
all done with a palette knife.
>>REGINA: I didn't know that.
What about the poetry?
Because your poetry
is so Rumi-esque,
I kind of get it confused
between you and Rumi.
When did you start doing poetry?
>>SPHEERIS: About six.
Honestly, I started writing
little poems at six.
I didn't know what they were.
They were just
little word things.
My mother said, you wrote
a poem when you were six.
So the important thing
I'm trying to say here
is that we were encouraged to
always be creative and always
respect education.
Those were two things.
And I'm not talking about
what Don Miguel Ruiz calls
the domestication of our
humanity type of education.
It was more whatever inspires
the intellect, whatever
great idea's coming,
whatever wisdom
we can acquire or tap into.
That kind of education.
>>REGINA: OK.
So can I read a
little quote here?
>>SPHEERIS: Please.
>>REGINA: OK.
This is from Edith Hamilton's
work called "The Greek Way."
And I love this quote
because it fits so perfectly
with what you just said.
So it says, "Greek religion
was developed not by priests
nor by prophets nor by saints
nor by any set of men who
were held to be removed from
the ordinary run of life because
of a superior
degree of holiness.
It was developed by poets and
artists and philosophers, all
of them people who instinctively
leave thought and imagination
free."
>>SPHEERIS: I love that.
Instinctively.
Key word, right?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
And this was the development
of religion, right?
And there are references
to-- of Thomas Jefferson
of spirituality and developing
the premises of our country.
>>REGINA: Oh, yes.
One of my heroes.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
So I want to read you something.
Right across the
street from my hotel--
which was the Boulderado this
morning, which was actually
quite wonderful, so
I don't mind plugging
this hotel-- was a place
called Rembrandt Yard.
And I'm looking
at Rembrandt Yard
and I'm going, what is this?
And on the building--
and this is so funny,
I'm not not loving
you by doing this,
I'm actually the opposite--
on the building were quotes.
And I found one that
really moved me.
It's a Picasso quote,
and here's what it says.
"The defining
function of the artist
is to cherish consciousness."
The defining function
of the artist
is to cherish consciousness.
>>REGINA: Which is also the
basic spiritual tenet of--yes.
>>SPHEERIS: I think that's
our saving grace right there.
>>REGINA: OK, but we're
totally cut off from that.
Now we're cut off from that.
And so when we look
at society at large,
when we look at people around
us, as I said in the opening,
we're seeing primarily
exhaustion, fear, defeatism.
We've been inundated
to the point where
we feel very small and less.
We don't have the energy.
How do you view--
>>SPHEERIS: What a
great word, energy.
Because I have a metaphor
that came to me about energy.
If you look at
what's popular now,
we're starting to
move our energy source
from finite fossil fuel
to almost infinite solar,
or other sources.
So let's look at
that as a metaphor.
>>REGINA: Perpetually plentiful.
>>SPHEERIS: The reason
we're getting tired,
exhausted, frustrated,
cut out, alienated,
all that stuff is
because we are tapping
into our ego
consciousness for fuel.
And that seems to be
running our society
in a way that makes
us feel old and tired
and all those things
you mentioned.
Now, there is an
alternate energy source.
It's tapping into
our inspiration.
It's tapping into our real
fuel, which is our innocence.
It's our state of
awareness and presence.
It's all these things.
It's our creativity.
If we tap into that, as opposed
to our own self-concept.
I mean, here's the
way I look at it.
Our culture, to me,
looks like this.
It looks like we're all
at a Halloween party,
and we're believing that
the person is the costume.
And we're forgetting
that there's
a person behind the costume.
And that's how I
see ego awareness,
is in such a strong illusion.
And we're forgetting
that there is
a pure soul behind
the masks we wear.
So how do we get back, right?
We do what we can to connect
to our innocence, which
happens through enthusiasm
and passion and compassion
and love.
And all these--
there's several things
that I could
probably keep naming.
>>REGINA: But it's
any entry point
that takes us into that,
whatever that may be, right?
>>SPHEERIS: Well,
if it brings us
into the full awareness of our
experience, which fun does.
Play.
>>REGINA: See, that
never gets mentioned.
All these interviews
I do and such, we
don't talk about the
function of play.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
Check it out.
You get a room full of children.
Let's say you put 20
children in a room like this,
and you close them off, and
you don't tell them anything.
You leave him alone and
you watch through a window.
Well, I would guarantee
you, within minutes
they're going to start figuring
something, some way of playing.
They're going to be doing
something, laughing,
goofing around, tumbling around.
Maybe they'll organize
some funny thing.
They're going to
do something fun.
You put 20 adults
in the same room,
they're just gonna
start talking.
>>REGINA: After the
awkwardness and silence
wears off, self-consciousness
and who begins.
>>SPHEERIS: So here's
the difference.
It's a full body
experience, right?
It's a feeling thing.
You just have fun.
Adults talk because
it's through the brain.
It's all very mental.
So adults are functioning
from here on up,
and kids are fully functioning.
Now this is the
change that we go
through from before the
age of five till 12 and on.
We become domesticated
as beings.
So there is hope, but it's not
where a lot of people put it.
I'm not criticizing
a lot of self-help,
because it's not what
I'm talking about.
I'm talking about where
our culture puts hope.
And where it puts hope is in
the places of achievement,
in attractiveness, in power.
And even self-worth has a
really tricky ego side to it
if you don't really understand
which self you're referencing.
Are you referencing
the ego self?
Well, then, the more you
feel your ego is worth,
the bigger the illusion.
But if you conceive of
yourself as the bigger self,
as the beautiful
consciousness that's
coming through you at all
times, well, then self-worth
is infinite.
That's a whole different
way of looking at it.
>>REGINA: Well, and the egoic
self is trapped in this state,
and kept trapped.
And let's talk about the
trappings of media, society,
and what is being reflected
back to us, because it's
encouraging a state of need.
>>SPHEERIS: And need
promotes the economy,
and the economy is the way
the global culture relates
to itself.
So our currency as
a global culture
is material, also finite.
Now imagine--and this is very
Pollyanna of me, I admit--
imagine if our currency
were generosity, were love.
Then everyone has the
potential to be rich.
It's unlimited.
It's not allocated
to different people.
It's democratic.
And this is the thing about
inspiration and creativity.
It's free, it's effortless,
it's fully democratic.
It's fun.
It evokes passion.
There are so many things
about allowing inspiration
and creativity to happen.
You don't have to pay for it.
It doesn't just belong
to certain people.
>>REGINA: And it is the most
satisfying and enjoyable--
those are the most satisfying
and enjoyable moments
in our lives, when we're
participating in that.
And it can be the mundane.
You can't buy it.
And it is the most
fun and satisfy.
>>SPHEERIS: There it is.
There is no mundane when you're
in a state of inspiration.
It's all the same.
You're all there.
Doesn't matter
what you're doing.
Let me give you an example.
When I do my workshops,
oftentimes people
will very self-consciously
say, well, I'm
not a creative person.
And now I look at them
and I say, I disagree.
You're creating an
entire universe.
You're imagining, and
so you're creating
in your consciousness
an entire universe.
Of course you're creative.
And look at you.
You're wearing a beautiful
shirt and you wear your hair
like that.
And no one else looks like
that or talks like that.
You've created a unique
form of art in who you are.
And so to deny one's creativity
is to deny one's humanity,
is to deny one's existence.
So even to start opening the
mind to what I just said,
it starts to melt down all
these judgmental distinctions.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And let's talk about
what people are
like when they come to your
workshops to begin with.
Because I would imagine there
is a very big difference
between the closed down,
contracted person that walks in
and the person that walks out.
But let's talk about the
state you find people in
and the biggest obstacles
within their own being
to be able to even
step out of anything
that they would do habitually.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
Well, often, though not
always, when people come,
they're quiet.
They're dressed in their usual
"this is my me costume" kind
of thing.
And it's sweet and charming.
And I have lovely
people in my workshops.
And I have to remind
myself that I'm here
to represent non-judgment
and love and acceptance
and compassion and all that.
Because I have an ego
like everyone else.
And put in the wrong situation,
I could become that mask.
I can become like that.
Fortunately, in my
workshops, I work for days
just to cleanse
my consciousness.
So when I receive people, I'm
receiving the namaste in them,
I'm receiving the god in them.
I'm saying, this is an
expression of innocence.
So oftentimes people will
come a little self-conscious,
am I going to have
to say anything?
Do I have to show my art?
And I'm like, no, this
is not about that.
This is the opposite of that.
This is about you having
your experience for yourself
in your journal, on paper,
if we're going to be writing.
It's all for you.
No one is going to be confronted
to even get up and speak
in any way.
>>REGINA: So the pressure's off.
First you have to take
all the pressure off.
OK.
>>SPHEERIS: That's
the first thing.
And then the next thing I do
is talk about identity, which
I just referenced
a little while ago.
It's the who are we?
That's the first step in my
workshops, is who are we.
Because really,
if I don't address
who are we, then when I say
the word you or we or I,
no one knows who
I'm talking about.
They could be thinking
that when I say I,
I'm Chris Spheeris, the
recording artist who's
this and that, has
these accomplishments,
looks like this,
dresses like this.
That's not who
I'm talking about.
When I look at I
and I look at you,
I'm addressing
the master in you.
Because if the master in me
can address the master in you,
then we are meeting
at a very beautiful
and nonjudgmental and inspired
level of consciousness.
So that's where I address
the people in the workshop.
>>REGINA: So you
have to identify
that aspect of all--
both selves, all selves.
>>SPHEERIS: All I have to
do is represent that myself,
and that's where
we're going to meet.
>>REGINA: And it kind of brings
people up in resonance to that?
>>SPHEERIS: If they
want to do that.
If they-- well, nobody
has to do anything.
But what it does
is it provides--
it holds space for
that to happen.
Really, it just holds space.
And then often, I just see
so many transformations
of people who are
very self-conscious.
One gentleman said in the
last workshop, he goes,
I haven't danced in 20 years.
And this was so
much fun, I'm gonna
go home and dance more now.
>>REGINA: Oh, that's so sweet.
>>SPHEERIS: Because we
do different things,
and they're all fun, and no
one's looking at anybody.
And it's all this beautiful,
trusting atmosphere, to be,
just to be free and expressive.
And that's-- we're going back to
the play and the child and that
sort of thing.
>>REGINA: OK.
So I'm thinking of something
I have to bring up here,
which is so cool.
So my son Stewart
went his entire life
through the Waldorf
School system
starting with kindergarten.
And kindergarten in the
Sacramento Waldorf School
is heaven on earth.
You have the Red Rose
and the White Rose rooms.
These are beautiful handmade
buildings all polished woods,
beautiful hand-dyed fabrics,
curtains, things floating,
little areas of
play where you have
a table with sandboxes here.
And you have a
little area where you
can play your little
musical instruments,
or your little
cooking set over here.
And in the early
years of Waldorf,
the kids are all
encouraged to just create.
They have a lot
of plays, and they
have a little stage where
you get up and pretend
this and that.
But the interesting thing is
that during the annual auction
each year, one of
the things that
goes for the highest amount
of money at the auction
is a group of something
like six parents
can go back to the White
Rose or Red Rose kindergarten
room for a day and live
like those little kids live.
It's amazing.
That always goes first.
Everyone's oh my god, oh, you
got the White Rose kindergarten
day.
And so what is that
saying about us?
>>SPHEERIS: Everybody
loves to play deep inside.
Everybody loves to feel
love, and everybody
loves to be loved.
Everybody loves fun,
everybody loves enthusiasm.
Everybody just loves the
stuff that fuels kids.
We all love it.
And it's accessible
to everybody.
So that's the deal.
Most adults think, oh, I was
like that when I was a child.
But now I have to work
and I have to make money.
Well, yes.
But reality, though
it has its parameters,
doesn't have to be that serious.
To me, it's not the music
that makes you stop dancing,
it's that you dance to
whatever music is on.
So whether it's the corporate
music that's going on,
that reality, you can
still dance within that.
You can still be responsible.
And one of the big things
is to honor yourself.
If you're in a space, in
a job, in a situation,
in a relationship that you
feel is degrading your spirit,
well then, you either need to
work at creatively changing
that or get out as fast
as possible, because that
is a form of self-abuse if
you're constantly reiterating
this self-destructive pattern.
However, the pressure
valves are like, well,
where do I find fun?
And how can I track my passion?
Passion is so important.
Everybody wants passion.
They always equate that to sex,
and that's just too obvious.
A passion for living,
a passion for cooking,
a passion for having children,
a passion for mopping the floor.
It doesn't matter.
Because if you become
engaged in anything--
and this is where the word
mundane starts opening up
to everything-- whatever you put
all your attention to, or make
it fun--
>>REGINA: --is art, really.
>>SPHEERIS: It is art, exactly.
And that's where
we're all artists.
And that's also where
we can also find passion
in the simplest of things.
>>REGINA: OK.
So from there-- and I
mean, it's just beautiful,
what you just said--
instead, we start
going into this world beginning
with kindergarten, a very
linear-- well,
except for Waldorf,
and I'm bringing this up
for a reason-- in Waldorf,
until they're about
eight or nine years old,
they cut the corners
off the paper.
They're all rounded.
And the reason for it is--
you know what the reason is--
to allow for creative
thinking and not
create linear thinking too early
in life, because they don't
want to shut that process down.
Now, one of the
things you talk about
is the difference between this
kind of linear creative force
and a quantum creative force.
And that's going to take us
into a really magical story
in a moment.
But if you'll first comment on
it to set the context for it.
>>SPHEERIS: Love to.
Recently I realized
that I'm living
in a balance between two worlds.
Not just I--I think we all are.
And because we exist
in these bodies,
we deal with a certain
amount of finiteness.
We're here for a certain
amount of time in these bodies.
Our bodies move and
age and do all this.
We eat.
So much of our
material world, I mean,
it's basically finite in the
way we can experience it,
so including our lives.
However, we also have this
equally as important element.
And I say equal because there's
a balance between the two,
because we do live
in our bodies.
We want to honor this reality,
but we also live in a place
where-- I call it the quantum
field, which is maybe different
than the way maybe Joe
Dispenza or Gregg talks about,
because I'm not a physicist.
But I look at quantum as,
when you make a quantum leap,
there's no precedent
for that quantum leap.
It defies the laws
of probability.
Now as an artist and
a creator, I only
can speak from my own
experience that whatever
I create-- whether it's a
song, or whether it's a poem,
or whether it's even sometimes
a photograph or some digital art
or a film, a short film
that I make-- I really
don't know where that came from.
>>REGINA: It's always
beyond those limitations.
>>SPHEERIS: It's
never predictable.
It's like, I could lead
up to it by practicing
scales and learning
chords and all that.
But when I truly open up
to real, pure inspiration
and let myself just go
and become a vehicle--
and that's a really
important concept
that I don't want to-- I
want to elaborate on that--
and to become a
vehicle of creation,
and just let it go and trust--
another important concept--
what comes out
surprises me constantly.
So I feel-- and oftentimes
I'll create something that's
completely unprecedented
in my field, and I'm like,
where did that come from?
And I call that a quantum leap.
I call creativity comes
out of the quantum
field of endless
possibility, and that
is the field of miracles also.
As a matter of fact,
in the quantum field,
miracles are normal.
>>REGINA: But that requires
your letting go of yourself.
This is the big
problem with us, is
like we won't let our identity
of what we think is ourself
open up, and set it
aside long enough
to even see-- because people
are so uncomfortable with it--
to see what kind of magic
might pour through us.
People have a lot of
fear of just setting
that notion of self aside.
>>SPHEERIS: Let
me read something
that came to me this morning.
And I have to read
it because it's
an interesting comment
on what you just said.
Our egos are created
as a healthy mechanism
to keep us from abuse
or self-abuse or pain.
So for awhile, they're
important to be here.
But we've taken
them too seriously,
and now we believe that we
are our defense mechanism.
So I what I wrote,
which I thought
was kind of cool--
the ego is constantly
performing preemptive strikes
on our pure awareness.
>>REGINA: Yes, it is.
>>SPHEERIS: That's what's going
on-- from what you just said,
that's what's
going on right now.
That's taking the costume
for the being behind it.
So in relation to that,
we have the capacity
at any time to surrender
into our state of pure being.
And the symptoms
of that surrender,
which involves trust that there
is something when we release
our egos, are all
those beautiful things.
You feel peaceful.
You feel connected.
You feel love.
You feel enthusiasm.
You feel creative.
See, the Eastern religions
bring in the whole notion
of surrender, whereas
the western religions
can be very punishing.
>>REGINA: So in
the west, the way
we've compensated
for that is by way
of either religion--
like OK, it's up to you,
please take care of me.
That's our form of surrender
in Christianity, for example.
OK, God, take care of
the situation, please.
Or meditation, which
people can open up
for moments of that to their--
and surrender to something,
for usually just a
few moments, though.
>>SPHEERIS: But there's a link.
There's an interesting link.
I was thinking about this.
When someone says, I
give my life over to God.
I give my life over to Jesus.
It's kind of the same thing
as saying, when I meditate,
something comes
in and takes over.
It's kind of like what Eckhart
Tolle would refer to as,
whatever he uses-- pure
consciousness, pure awareness,
being in the now.
It's really the same thing.
So when someone Is
truly born again,
it's also the
beginner's mind, where
you're able to constantly
refresh the screen,
and you're able to stay
in that child space.
And that's the most
beautiful space there is.
And that's where innocence is.
And I think most of us-- I won't
make a blanket statement to say
all of us-- still have
access to our innocence.
I want to believe that all
of us do, but most of us
still have access
to our innocence.
And that's just the
most beautiful place.
>>REGINA: That's
where the joy is.
That's where all the joy is.
>>SPHEERIS: It's pure being.
>>REGINA: OK.
So this whole quantum realm of
something that flows through.
And also-- now we're going to
extend the conversation-- it
doesn't just flow
through, but it animates.
And let's talk about what
happened to you recently,
because it was a
life-altering event for you.
And it goes back
to that piece that
played in the
beginning, "Horepse."
And take time to tell
the story, and you
can tell it in as much detail as
you want because it's beautiful
and it does tie back to that.
>>SPHEERIS: Sure.
Let me just say that since
this experience happened,
I have gone through a quantum
leap in how I'm perceiving
things and how I'm
processing them.
I can't describe that right now
because it's too new for me,
but I will never be the
same after this experience.
What you showed earlier was
a song I played for my father
about maybe two or
three months ago.
It's his favorite song.
It's called "Horepse".
In Greek, that means dance.
It's all about the sort
of the Zorba mentality
of living your passion.
And that's certainly
the example--
>>REGINA: And you wrote that?
>>SPHEERIS: I wrote
the music to it,
and a Greek lyricist
wrote the lyrics to it.
Certainly the example
of my father-- and he
has always been exemplary
of enjoying every moment.
>>REGINA: We see him
sitting in the audience.
He's smiling, his little goatee,
watching you as you're playing.
He's so happy to hear it.
>>SPHEERIS: He's
the most-- he's been
one of most-- one
of the people that's
been the greatest example
of enjoy every minute
of your life.
Because you never
know, this could
be your first and your last
moment right here, right now.
>>REGINA: Well, he's had a
lot of brushes with death,
hasn't he, since the
age of, what, 20, 21?
>>SPHEERIS: Yes.
He had a plane crash at 19, and
his odds were very, very low
that he would survive.
However, he did.
OK.
So here's what happened.
I was recently in Greece.
I came back.
I saw my dad the
day I came back.
We spent some time together.
We went and bought
groceries together.
And how charming that he would
insist on buying my groceries.
>>REGINA: He was so
happy to see you.
>>SPHEERIS: It
was very touching.
I didn't want him to, but I
was so touched, I let him.
I dropped him off.
He looked great.
At his age, he's 90.
You never know.
Some days he's weaker,
some days he's stronger.
He was having a good day,
and I was really happy
that after a month
he looked so good.
I went to bed, and for
some unknown reason
I brought my cell
phone up with me.
And really I never do that.
I haven't done that in years.
>>REGINA: Your cell
phone next to the bed.
>>SPHEERIS: My cell phone,
I put it next to my bed.
I don't know why, because
I really needed sleep.
I was completely jet lagged.
And I went to bed.
And at about 3 o'clock in the
morning, 3:15 in the morning,
I was semi-awake, my cell
phone started going off.
And I looked at it,
it was my dad's cell,
and I thought, well, maybe he's
pocket dialing me or something.
I didn't think anything of it.
Anyway his wife said, Chris, I'm
at the Sedona Medical Center.
Your father's had a heart
attack and it's really bad.
So I knew that at his
age and his state,
his heart's a little weak,
he was most likely going
to be dead, especially
from the tone of her voice.
So in 20 minutes of
driving, I prepared myself
to not only accept
my father's passing,
but to be able to see
him in that state.
And something took
over, something
very clear and present,
I have to say, took over.
I wasn't shaking, rattling,
crying, screaming.
I was very clear
in the way I drove.
>>REGINA: You're very
close with your father.
So this could have been a very
emotionally thrashing event.
You guys are almost
like twin souls.
>>SPHEERIS: In a beautiful way.
You know, not overly enmeshed.
So I get there, and I'm going to
try to make this story slightly
short, because it could go on.
And the medical tech
says, your father
had a massive heart attack.
We've restarted his heart.
We're working on him right now.
Would you like us to continue?
And his wife very respectfully
said, Chris, you make the call.
And I said no.
He wouldn't want that.
>>REGINA: Your dad didn't
want a resuscitate.
>>SPHEERIS: Do not resuscitate.
That was there.
His wife was too shocked to
even tell the med techs that.
So they said, OK, we'll stop.
So he goes back, comes back,
he goes I'm really sorry.
Would you like to
come and see him?
So that was about
five or 10 minutes,
and I thought, OK,
the show is over.
So we went into the room,
and he was lying down.
His eyes were open, he
was staring into the void.
There was definitely
nobody home.
The doctor had checked
his pupil several times.
There was no pupil
response at all.
>>REGINA: Had they called
the time of death by then?
>>SPHEERIS: Not yet.
He was purple, so
he was cyanotic,
and obviously had--
whatever they call it,
there's some word
for it when you're
deprived of oxygen--
hypoxic or something.
Anyway, there was no
movement in his chest.
I even checked for a pulse
just because I wanted to.
But I could tell from the
look on his face, he was gone.
And he was almost as
blue as this shirt.
So I'm sitting there--
>>REGINA: And he wasn't
breathing anymore
at this point.
He hadn't been for a long time.
>>SPHEERIS: Oh, no his
chest was this far from me,
and I as watching it,
and I saw that they
had put a needle or something.
There was some blood
there from something.
They had maybe shot him
with something, adrenaline,
whatever, to get
the heart going.
But I was looking
because I really
wanted to believe
he was still there.
But he wasn't.
And it was really obvious to the
feeling of him that it wasn't.
So I'm looking at
Nancy, his wife,
and we're looking at each
other going, he's finally dead.
And I'm looking at him
and I'm going, god,
he even looks
handsome when he dies.
What could we say?
He was gone.
>>REGINA: Just in shock.
>>SPHEERIS: Here's what
was really important
about that moment.
Two things.
One is, I looked at his neck.
There was this slight
movement, this sort
of billowing of something.
I've never seen
those muscles move.
And I asked the
doctor and he goes,
that's called agonal breathing,
and that will disappear.
It's just a response
you have after you go,
in maybe 20 minutes.
And I said, well, I'm going to
stay here until that stops, OK?
And he's like really cool.
Stay as long as you want.
All right, he
says, but I'm going
to have to call time of death.
And I said, you do
what you need to do.
Because we're OK with that,
we're accepting that he's gone.
So he says, OK,
official time of death,
and someone's writing on a
clipboard, 4:08 AM because they
have to do that legally.
All right.
So I'm sitting there holding
his hand, and Nancy, his wife,
is holding his other hand.
And we're in the room just
thinking of how surreal,
and trying to make plans,
and what are we going to do.
And she said, here,
take his watch,
and I've been wearing
it ever since.
And it was one of those moments.
Here's what's important.
I never had a sense of an
individuated soul, really.
I mean, I believe
everything's energy.
And I also believe everything is
imbued with God force and life
force, and that's
really the crux
of all the stuff
we're talking about.
But I never believed
in an individuated soul
leaving the body.
But there was something in
the room that I could feel.
It wasn't him.
It wasn't a personal energy.
But there was something
so rich in the room
that there was a presence there.
And I'm like, OK.
I've heard of this.
And I was speaking to him.
I said, Dad, I'm OK.
You go.
Be in peace.
I love you.
I'm going to be all right.
Because I knew he would
be concerned about me.
And his wife also
said the same thing.
Andy, do what you need
to do, blah, blah, blah.
OK
Let me go to the part where
it gets really interesting.
>>REGINA: And you
have to take it
back to where
"Horepse" comes in.
>>SPHEERIS: Oh, yeah, of course.
Right, now I guess.
Thank you.
I had my phone with me,
being addicted, of course.
I took a picture of him.
I asked if it was OK with
Nancy, and she said, sure.
Being an artist, I took a
picture my dad's dead face.
And I took a picture
of me holding his hand
and her holding his other hand.
For whatever reason, I have
no idea, it just felt right.
And then I got on YouTube, and
I found the song of "Horepse,"
me playing it for him,
and I played it for him.
Because he always
asked me, every time he
came to my concerts, which
is almost all my concerts,
he always wanted
to hear that song.
So I said, here, Dad,
here's your going-out piece.
So I played if for him.
All right.
So about 20 minutes
later-- and we're
still going through
our stuff, his neck
is still kind of moving in that
weird way, almost like a frog,
or a fish with gills.
I saw his Adam's Apple move.
And I'm thinking,
well, that's weird.
Is that one of those
after-death responses?
And I'm holding him,
and he's purple,
and, you know-- and
I brought the nurse
and I said, nurse, is
the Adam's Apple movement
part of that thing?
She goes, not really.
I said, well, will
you watch, please?
A couple minutes later, a few
minutes later, he moved again,
and she said, oh my god.
That's exactly what she said.
She called in the crew,
she says, get back in here.
Bring the monitor.
Blah, blah, blah.
It's like in "Grey's Anatomy"
or one of those things.
Slapping on the things,
putting together the wires.
Within seconds, he was
back on the monitor,
and the first thing I
heard was, we have a pulse.
He was legally dead
for 22 minutes.
He was actually dead for over
30, because I was in the room.
Because they didn't
call it for awhile.
>>REGINA: Now that kind
of oxygen deprivation
to the brain, 150% of the time,
means severe brain damage.
>>SPHEERIS: Oh, before
he was even-- before they
took the monitors and
stopped working on his heart,
they said less than 1%
chance, if his heart continued
to beat on its own,
that he would not
be a complete vegetable.
Less than 1% chance.
He went another 30 minutes
of being dead beyond that.
Make a long story short--and I
know that we only have so much
time in this interview--
>>REGINA: No, this is
so fascinating, so tell.
>>SPHEERIS: Well, my dad,
when they slapped the oxygen
mask on, started to come to.
And within some unknown
amount of time--
because I was in a
dream at that point--
he actually squeezed
the nurse's hand when
she said, can you hear me?
And finally they just
said, prepare an ICU room
at the hospital, which
was 20 minutes away.
I thought, well, this is good.
He's alive.
And we know he was
in there, right?
His eyes had closed.
He came back in.
I no longer felt the presence
in the room, which was bizarre.
He was--
>>REGINA: Back in the body.
>>SPHEERIS: His life
force was sucked back in.
And on the way to
the hospital there
was the most beautiful,
beautiful rainbow.
Came out of nowhere.
It wasn't even raining.
I mean, there were clouds.
I said to his wife, I said,
Nancy, either he's gone
and sending us a rainbow,
or something really amazing
is in the process of
happening, which it was anyway.
OK.
Here's where I'll
fast forward a little.
And I'll tell the story
in writing somewhere
on a website one day.
Beyond any expectation of
the cardiologist, anyone,
all the doctors and everything,
my dad in five days recovered.
In the first 24 hours, he was
able to speak Greek and English
to his friend on the phone.
He has zero loss of
any cognitive function.
His body's a little weak from
laying in a hospital for five
days and being at a rehab center
another four or five days.
But in a few days,
they're actually
going to release him from
the rehab center to go home.
>>REGINA: I mean, it's really--
this is, again, the quantum
reality animating us
for whatever reason.
And maybe his love
for you, and we
can talk about that in a moment.
But after I heard this
story, I called my sister,
who's worked in cardiology her--
basically entire adult life.
And so she's been through
thousands and thousands
of cases and seen all of it.
And I told her that story.
And I said, what do you think
could have happened there?
She said, no.
She said, I've never seen it
happen in all these years.
She said one time, after they'd
been working for 20 minutes
to revive a woman,
she came back,
but then she died
right away after that,
within 24 hours in fact.
But she has never heard
of a person coming
from that state of affairs
back to full consciousness,
and then continue to live.
So that's now over
in the category
of the power of what
that soul force can do.
And when you talked about
the quality-- off camera,
again-- of that soul
force, it was interesting,
because it wasn't your
dad's personality.
>>SPHEERIS: But it was
so apparent and palpable.
And I have to say something.
I was not a witness
to a miracle.
I was part of that miracle.
>>REGINA: I believe
that you were, yes.
>>SPHEERIS: And so was his wife.
We were holding onto him.
We were feeling his life force.
We were not asking
him to come back.
That was very important.
I had no coercion, nor did she.
But I have to say this.
It's been about 10 days
now, and I am radically
changed from that experience.
I said it earlier,
but I'll say it again.
I don't see things
in the same way.
I don't feel things
>>REGINA: I know
it's still early on.
Do you have any
kind of, maybe, way
to share a feeling that you
have that's changed within that,
if you can't explain it exactly?
>>SPHEERIS: I mean, this soft,
mushy, connected cloud of love
that I-- I mean, for
example, and this is-- I'll
just give you an example.
I was at the airport
the other day,
getting in line when
we were flying here.
But it was-- Southwest
Airlines lines everybody up.
And it was rather tedious,
even though I understand
how it works for the airline.
The airline was great.
But normally I would kind
of go into my grumpy face,
and I would look around, and I'd
feel alienation and how people
are this and that
and I don't connect.
>>REGINA: Ego.
>>SPHEERIS: Yeah,
my ego would be up
because I'd be
grumpy and cranky.
For some unknown
reason, what came
to me is, every single
person I looked at,
I decided to
project love to them
in the same way I
projected love to my father
while he was healing.
Came out of nowhere.
And it made the experience
of being there so beautiful.
I could have wait in
line for three hours.
It changed the entire texture.
The other day in the coffee
shop here in Boulder,
I was walking by tables winding
my way back to the restroom,
and I could feel
people's energy,
almost like in the sixth sense.
Now that could be a
temporary state of heightened
consciousness, but
I prefer to believe
that I'll never go back.
Because these are things
that-- this experience I had,
and that's why it's important
for us to share it--
these are things
that people talk
about that seem to be allocated
to the privileged few.
But I don't believe that.
We are all privy to miracles.
We just have to open ourselves
up and allow them to happen.
And that's really--
really, we're
balancing the quantum
and the linear.
Here in our culture, we're
way up on the linear and way
down the quantum.
We're so convinced that we're
stuck in this world that
is so finite and Newtonian,
and we're all just
bouncing off each other.
Where is this place?
In some sort of New
Age pond of silliness
that most linear
people criticize?
>>REGINA: When that is
the highest reality.
>>SPHEERIS: But this
is real, and there's
a reason why people talk
about spiritual things
in a sincere and
honest and open way.
>>REGINA: Well, let's
talk about that.
Because the mystic
and the artist--
like that Greek passage
at the beginning--
they're on the same frequency.
They're operating off
the same frequency.
>>SPHEERIS: I can only
say from my experience
that my spiritual process
has been through creativity.
So I can say that
I connect to what
is my God through the
process of creativity.
And the process entails giving
up my ego presence to something
that I trust is greater than me,
which is proving over and over
and over again to be true.
So the more I have experience
in it, the more I trust.
The more I trust, the
more I surrender to,
in my greatest
moments, and truly
my only moments of pure
presence, I am not here at all,
me as this mask,
person, body, costume.
But I'm really here.
And those are the
authentic moments.
And that's what
I work to impart,
even if it's for a few
moments, in my workshops.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's talk about
that, because now,
instead of going to
listen to someone lecture
on what consciousness,
awareness, and spirituality,
spiritual presence is, let's say
you're taking our viewers now
on a journey the other way.
Because wouldn't
it be a lot more
fun to find that
aspect of ourselves
through creating
something, through art?
>>SPHEERIS: Well,
I'll tell you what.
On camera here, in a minute,
I can suggest one exercise,
one simple exercise,
that if done properly--
that doesn't mean
you follow the rules,
it means you just
do it according
to the way I describe-- and
this is not my own exercise,
this used to be very
common-- all you have to do
is get a few sheets of clean
paper and a pen or a pencil.
And for any given
amount of time,
five minutes, 10
minutes, 15 minutes,
just write down your
thoughts as they come to you
without stopping, even
if they're nonsense,
even if they're
completely disconnected.
Write down every single thing
that comes into your head.
Just keep writing
and don't stop.
Madly dictate, constantly.
And I use this in my workshops.
>>REGINA: Do you
see a transition
that starts happening
midway through?
>>SPHEERIS: Sometimes people's
need to order things happens.
Sometimes a natural order
comes in for people.
As a creator, this is
called automatic writing.
I automatically create.
I mean, I just show up and
put my hands on the piano,
because the premise is, it
doesn't have to be anything.
And once we start trying to
force it to be something,
it stops the flow.
Because I've done automatic
writing, even in my workshops.
And sometimes I feel
my brain wanting
to go even one millisecond ahead
of me, and rhyme cute, do this.
No.
Stay present right now
and keep dictating.
Go so fast that you can't
even imagine what's coming.
>>REGINA: Anyone can do that.
>>SPHEERIS: Anyone can
do what I just said,
but now that's not just
an exercise for opening up
creativity.
That is an exercise for
practicing presence.
Now live it.
>>REGINA: That is an
exercising for accessing you.
>>SPHEERIS: Yes.
Because every moment,
we have that channel
of awareness available
to us, which is also
our instinct and our
intuition and our creativity,
and I call it also our love,
pouring in constantly, nonstop.
All we have to do is quiet
down in whatever way,
even if it's a
frantic quiet down.
When I get crazy on the piano
and I lose consciousness
of my linear, that's like
the most meditative thing
I do sometimes.
When I'm madly, crazily
framing a photograph or editing
a short film, when I am so
crazy, I'm drinking coffee,
I'm going nuts, I'm
going 100 miles an hour.
But that ego presence is gone.
I am just moving that energy.
Or, in the more Eastern sense,
becoming really, really,
really still and really
quiet, where you just
focus on every detail.
>>REGINA: And just
whatever's flowing
through is flowing through.
>>SPHEERIS: To honor feeling.
And here's the big thing.
It's what a lot of
people say is a movement
from a thought-based paradigm
to a feeling-based paradigm.
It's moving from the
head to the heart.
A lot of people talk about that.
Greg talks about that a lot.
And I think that
feelings are non-linear.
They're really kind
of non-predictable.
And they involve our organism
in a much bigger way.
And they're not prone
to interpretation.
Thoughts are always
interpretations of things.
Like thoughts, like
interpretations.
What did I experience?
The minute you start describing
what you're experiencing
or had experienced, you're
already in the past.
You're interpreting something
that happened before.
To be fully present,
there is no thought.
>>REGINA: So the feeling
is in the moment, which
is different than the emotions.
And we need to make
that delineation.
That feeling of life.
>>SPHEERIS: Well, I feel
really present right now.
I can't tell you I can
describe an emotion.
But I can tell you I feel
inspired and enthused,
and I'm excited,
and can you tell?
>>REGINA: Yes.
You're shining.
>>SPHEERIS: Well, when
I talk about this stuff,
it just starts pouring in.
>>REGINA: So that
childlike enthusiasm,
that's something
that your dad also
imparted to you is
never-- in fact,
he told you something
about enthusiasm.
>>SPHEERIS: He, for
many years, said,
as you get older the one
thing you should never lose
is your enthusiasm.
And it's funny that
you remembered that,
because it's a beautiful
piece of advice.
Enthusiasm.
Everyone says it.
They tell you what
the definition.
It means having God within you.
And this is the ancient Greek.
And when you have God in you,
you are being your existence.
You are fulfilling
your purpose here.
You don't have to
even know what it is.
When you're enthused, when
you're playing, when you're
having fun, when
you're inspired,
your purpose reveals
itself in every moment.
We're sitting here
trying to figure out--
I did it for decades--
what's my life about?
What's the meaning of all this?
Meaning and purpose can
be really different.
I am constantly
driven into my purpose
and meandering through it
by honoring my genuine self.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk for a moment
before we say goodbye, let's
talk about your workshops,
and kind of how that
flows, and what people do,
and why they come.
>>SPHEERIS: OK.
Well, and I hope to
have something online
when this airs.
And check it out on my website.
I'm really different
from most people,
because every workshop is
exactly where I've come to.
I don't do a beginners,
intermediate, and advanced.
They're all advanced.
But they're also really simple.
I don't use big language.
I don't try to make people
get it really in their heads.
Just the opposite.
I try to address things
in a very simple way.
And so whatever we do, we
always have an opportunity
to do things that are
free without expectation.
So whether we're
automatic writing,
whether we're doing
a movement exercise
where we put-- I put sort of
some non-linear music on that
changes beats, so
that people don't
get into the trance kind of
groove which is their default.
Because this is a metaphor.
When you constantly
have to respond
to music that is
constantly changing,
that is a great
exercise for becoming
present with this,
which life is music.
All this input, no matter
what you do, when you do it,
it's just music.
And as you improvise to it,
you dance through it all.
So it's a metaphor.
So whether we're doing
movement or whether we're
doing watercolors, which
is basically just basically
slapping on paint to rhythms
and things like that,
it's all free play.
We do some stuff where we
blow paint around, which
was taught to me by one
of my favorite people.
And there's also an
unwinding of the cognitive,
of the mental structures.
So I do talk quite a bit.
And each of my lecture
things are based on ideas
that we have presumed are
true, and they're like walls.
And through whatever
I share, I want
to show people that it
is possible to crack
that cognitive wall
that we're stuck in,
because it doesn't necessarily
look like that, at least
from one person's point of view.
And so what happens is people
tend to relax their being.
So if they're all wound up
from their job and their family
and this-- I like to
do three days at least,
three days when nobody has
to work or worry about it.
They have no responsibilities.
Just show up and be here, and
provide examples of presence.
Sometimes we go hiking.
And what's funny
in the hike, people
are always wanting to get there.
I took a three-mile hike today,
and it only took me an hour.
And I'm sitting
there thinking, I'd
like to take a three-foot
hike and have it take an hour.
I mean, really.
To be in full presence, right?
We don't do that.
But to say, it's not
about where we end up;
it's about feeling every moment
and every step of what's around
us and how beautiful
is in nature
and the quality of the air and
the sensation of the warmth
on your skin and feeling
your feet hit the ground.
It's all about that.
So we do consciousness
presence exercises.
>>REGINA: It sounds like
it's like going back
to Waldorf kindergarten.
>>SPHEERIS: Cool.
We're in the red petal room.
>>REGINA: Yeah,
the Red Rose room.
And on that subject of kids,
it was in the Nixon years
that the-- well, that
the budgets started
being nixed for all the
creative pursuits, music and art
in the public schools,
which is absolutely
had a devastating consequence
on society and the younger
generations, as
far as I can see.
There's still some
creativity that's popping up,
but the average kid is not
encouraged in that way anymore.
>>SPHEERIS: I was shocked when
my sister, who's a substitute
teacher, told me that kids only
have art class once a week.
We used to get it every day.
But they only have
gym once a week,
Phy Ed, whatever you call
it, a lot of public schools.
And I'm thinking, wow, the arts.
We had singing class,
we had drawing class.
And I went to a public school.
I went to a very average,
middle-class, beautiful school,
right.
>>REGINA: Me, too.
Art, music, instruments.
>>SPHEERIS: And that's
all being, like, leached
out of our culture.
And if you don't do
it with children,
where are they going
to go with that?
In your most open and fertile
time, where you can pick up
and you can expand exponentially
your creativity-- all
of a sudden they're
not even exposed to it.
>>REGINA: No, you become
a compliant species.
>>SPHEERIS: Doing
this, you know,
and becoming addicted to very
conformist kind of things.
Now there is hope.
There's plenty of
creative apps for kids,
and I've seen some of them.
So even--
>>REGINA: Oh,
they'll find a way.
They'll find a way.
But the point is it's
not being encouraged,
so fewer people are having
access on an encouragement
level.
If it's not happening
in the home--
and that's what you're
saying, if it's not happening
in the home, like it did
for you, and even for me
as a child, I was
always drawing,
playing the piano,
dancing and all that.
If that's not happening,
then they just
are going to be left
to their own devices,
literally, to find
their way to it.
>>SPHEERIS: Most people use
the computer or the television
as a babysitting device.
Now I have to
defend that, though,
because we're in
economic conditions that
weren't the same as when I was
being raised in the '60s, where
my mother could stay home.
Usually the wife stayed
home with the kids.
There weren't a lot of
career moms, percentage-wise,
in those days.
Now we have to have
two-career parents
because we can't afford it.
So what are we gonna
do with our kids?
I'm a traditionalist.
Even though I don't have
kids, I love to see,
like, the guy goes to work--
I'm not a chauvinist at all,
but sometimes there's a balance.
I don't say that every woman
should stay in the home.
I'm not like that at all.
>>REGINA: Yeah, you
don't have to qualify it.
>>SPHEERIS: Well,
I don't want people
getting all weird about it.
But I love the balance, for me
personally, of being the guy.
And I want to be the provider.
And if my partner loves to
be at home and whatever,
and if we had kids, that
would be a perfect balance.
Keep the mother at home with
the kids as much as possible.
Or find a sister, or a nanny,
whatever, that's really
open and creative and
loving, so the kids can
play in that extended period
where play doesn't just
start to diminish into some
electronic, hypnotic thing
that basically puts your mind
to sleep rather than awakens it
creatively.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Because that creates
a compliant species.
And that is what
allows larger systems
to take advantage of us.
And in that, I think we've
just set up something
that I would like you to read.
Because it was
interesting that Nixon
is the one who
started eliminating
the budgets for poetry,
for art, for expression,
arts in public education.
And this is something
that preceded it.
And this is a beautiful quote.
And we're going
to go out on that.
So if anyone wants to find
you, it's chrisspheeris.com.
They can find out about your
workshops, music, art, and all
that.
So on that note, I'm going
to have you read this.
This is a quote, John F.
Kennedy, just a few weeks
before he was assassinated.
This is from a speech he
did at Amherst College.
So we're going to
go out on that,
and we're going to listen to
you play the music underneath,
or see you playing
as well underneath.
But if you would please
share this quote.
And now I want to thank you
for this incredibly inspiring
conversation.
>>SPHEERIS: I want to make sure
I say the same thing to you
and everyone at Gaiam.
This has been-- this
is such a rush for me.
I had a ball.
Really, thank you.
I did my favorite
thing to do, which
is share this kind of stuff.
OK.
John F. Kennedy.
"When power leads
men toward arrogance,
poetry reminds him
of his limitations.
When power narrows the
areas of man's concern,
poetry reminds him of the
richness and diversity
of his existence.
When power corrupts,
poetry cleanses.
For art establishes
the basic human truth
which must serve as the
touchstone of our judgment.
The artist, however faithful to
his personal vision of reality,
becomes the last champion of the
individual mind and sensibility
against an intrusive society
and an officious state."
[PIANO PLAYING]